Introduction : A database is a collection of data that is organised in a way that makes it easily accessed and maintained. We normally store data using a relational database. What this means is that we’re going to store the data in more than one table and these tables will be linked together by certain fields.
Relations – Most of us know what a table is from using spreadsheet software. It is a grid made up of rows and columns. Well in relational databases we often refer to these as “relations”.
Tuples – A row in a table is known as a record, or a tuple. A tuple holds all the data on a single item. For example, if we have a table to store book details for a shop, then each tuple is an individual book the shop sells, and it will store all the data on that individual book such as the ISBN, book title and price.
Attributes – An individual piece of data in a record is known as a field, or attribute. In the previous example we said that each record for a book will store the ISBN, book title and price. Well these three things are all examples of attributes. Attributes appear as columns in a database table.
Domains – All the possible allowable values for an attribute. This is slightly different to the data type of the attribute. For example, a field may have an integer number data type, which defines that it can only allow whole numbers to be entered. However, there may be additional rules applied, such as that the number must be between 1 & 10. The domain would therefore be this range of whole numbers.
Cardinality – How unique an attribute is in terms of its data values. Some attributes will have a wide range of different data values entered. For example, the primary key field will have a completely unique value for every record. Where there is a large percentage of unique values, this is known as “High Cardinality”. Where there are a lot of repeated values across the entities tuples, this is known as having “Low Cardinality”.
Table: a group of Records, each representing the same sort of data.
Record: also known as a row in a Table. Each row in a table is distinct, but all share a common set of Fields. All rows have the same kind of data, but refer to unique Records.
Field: also known as columns in a Table; (in Excel, the field names are what you would use for column headings)
Parse: to separate out the data into appropriate columns or fields; in Excel, the function Data / Text to Columns parses the file into Records (by rows) and Fields (by columns)
Delimiter: the character used to differentiate among the fields in a Record
Data entry: Creating, updating, and deleting records (Insert and Update Queries): in Excel, this can be done in the spreadsheet directly or using GUI interfaces
Sort: when the data are re-written in a specific order.
